title: Legal And Regulations
date: 2025-02-07
 Cryptocurrency is digital currency secured by cryptography. It is a digital asset where transactions are verified by blockchain technology using cryptography.

A good cryptocurrency will have a good decentralised platform. Cryptocurrencies' decentralised nature facilitates peer-to-peer transactions directly between individuals. So, instead of physical wallets and bank accounts, people access their crypto through unique crypto wallets or exchanges like Binance. Bitcoin is the first cryptocurrency, launched in 2009. As of January 2025, its market capitalisation exceeded $500 billion. Bitcoin has a limited supply of 21 million coins. Bitcoin is one of the cryptocurrencies, but the other coins are called ALT coins (alternative) due to the domination of Bitcoin.

The technology that enables these processes is called blockchain. When a transaction occurs, it is grouped with other transactions into a "block," which is then added to a chain of previously confirmed blocks, creating a continuous and immutable record. Each block contains a timestamp, a reference to the previous block (thus forming a chain), and a unique cryptographic hash that ensures its integrity. In simpler terms, blockchain is a distributed database where pieces of data are bundled into blocks and chained together.

Types of Crypto Companies

Cryptocurrency Exchanges
Blockchain Development Companies
Crypto Wallet Providers
Cryptocurrency Mining Companies
Payment Service Providers
Decentralised Finance (DeFi) Platforms
Crypto Media and Analytics
Investment and Custody Firms


Cryptocurrency exchange can happen through centralized and decentralised platforms.
Binance is an example of a centralised platform, it acts as an intermediary and controls the platform.
Binance also works in decentralised platforms. While a decentralised platform allows users to trade cryptocurrencies directly with one another without intermediaries. Blockchain development companies work in various aspects, from creating apps for decentralized platforms to offering blockchain development services, smart contracts, etc.

Crypto wallet providers—Crypto wallet providers offer services for securely storing, sending, and receiving cryptocurrencies. There are different types of wallets, including software wallets, hardware wallets, and web-based wallets. Here are some of the most popular and reputable crypto wallet providers.

Payment service providers (PSPs) in the crypto space facilitate the acceptance, processing, and transfer of cryptocurrency payments for businesses and consumers. These services enable merchants to accept digital currencies as payment for goods and services, offering a bridge between traditional financial systems and the cryptocurrency ecosystem. Bitpay is an example of this.


Centralised Finance (CeFi) & Decentralised Finance (DeFi)

CeFi companies act as an intermediary in crypto exchanges, this is done by the traditional setup of creating user accounts, and orders are matched and executed in the internal system. KYC is required to be conducted and rules and regulations such as AML, Data privacy and protection are needed to be followed. Cefi can also provide fiat money gateways i.e. fiat-crypto transactions and vice-versa can be done. Companies such as Binance and Coinbase use CiFi, Cifi provides ease of use and requires less technical knowledge from the users.


DeFi means a decentralised platform where there is no central authority and transactions are been shared without any intermediary.DeFi uses smart contracts to automate financial processing. Smart contracts on blockchain networks enable users to transact cryptocurrency.

Smart contracts are not legal contracts; they are self-executing contracts with terms and conditions directly written into code. If the pre-determined conditions are met, the contract automatically enforces.
The terms of smart contracts are visible to everyone in blockchain. 

In DeFi, the funds are user-controlled, and the security of the funds is in the user's hands. The system is open to everyone and it's fully transparent.

               Feature


                   CeFi
                      DeFi
 

         Control


Centralised authority (company governance).


Decentralised governance (smart contracts


         Custody




Assets held by the platform (custodial wallets), the security is provided by the company,


Users retain control of their assets (non-custodial wallets).


        Transparency


Limited transparency in operations.


Transparent operations via blockchain.


        KYC/AML Compliance


Strict adherence to regulations.


Often pseudonymous transactions.

What legal regulations must companies in the UAE comply with?

The term virtual asset has been defined as a digital representation of value that can be digitally traded or converted and used for investment purposes. It does not include digital representations of fiat currencies or financial securities.

Cabinet Resolution No. (111) of 2022 on the Regulation of Virtual Assets and Their Service Providers sets federal regulations for virtual assets, defined as a digital representation of value that may be digitally traded, transferred, or used as an exchange or payment tool, or for investment purposes (“Virtual Asset”). It restricts involvement in specific regulated activities related to Virtual Assets (“Virtual Asset Activities”) unless a proper license is obtained from the Securities and Commodities Authority (“SCA”) or a local authority with the power to regulate Virtual Assets at the emirate level (eg-Dubai/VARA). Activities that don’t require a license include journalist and educational work publishing or presenting the content of or relating to any virtual asset or such activities, and those that deal in virtual assets with their funds.

The Virtual Assets Regulatory Authority (VARA): discussed later in this article.
Regulating authorities in UAE for Virtual Assets

SCA- Securities andCommodity Authority - Regulates all virtual assets across UAE excluding those mentioned below.
VARA- Virtual Asset service provider, covering the emirate of Dubai ( DIFC - Excluded)
DIFC—DIFC’s financial regulator is the Dubai Financial Services Authority (DFSA), which has developed a regulatory framework for investment tokens and crypto tokens.
ADGM-  Financial regulator FSRA- Financial Services Regulatory Authority


The term virtual asset has been defined as a digital representation of value that can be digitally traded or converted and used for investment purposes. It does not include digital representations of fiat currencies or financial securities.
